# Test Driven Development 101

## Why TDD
For the novice, at least, Test Driven Development appears convoluted and a
waste of valuable time. It isn't until you've experienced development without
it that you begin to experience why TDD is vitally important.

To illustrate this imagine a developer, let's call him Bill, working on a new
application that his company has requested. It isn't a big app and it doesn't
actually do an awful lot but someone has decided that the company has to have it
and wants it on every desktop.

Bill puts together a quick app that ticks the boxes, looks acceptable and
installs nicely on the company's computers. Job done, in record time. To do this
Bill has taken the list of requirements and assembled something quickly in code
that does the job plus a few ideas that Bill came up with along the way to make
it better.

A few weeks later Bill gets a phone call from one of the team leaders asking for
a quick change. An email with the requested changes turns up and Bill quickly
updates the code and deploys it.

Over the next few months, more requests come in and Bill deals with all of them,
suddenly the app is turning into a hub for all sorts of functionality, some of
it has nothing to do with the original ask but rather than roll out multiple
apps Bill puts them in one place.

Then things start to go wrong - it turns out that some essential calculations
in the app are incorrect in a few specific scenarios. Fixing that upsets the
calculations elsewhere but no-one spots it until the updated app has been in use
for a few days and now the company has to re-invoice some customers. Worse still
an update to the desktop operating system has resulted in some users unable to
log in to the app.

Bill tries to fix it but each update just seems to make things worse. The
company managers start to get worried and tells everyone to stop using the app
and it becomes useless clutter on the screen.

The story sounds a bit tragic and many people are quick to point fingers at Bill
for not doing the job right while Bill points fingers back at management for not
giving the right requirements. The reality is that this sort of thing used to be
(and still is) commonplace. Requirements are poorly defined, features go out
with only superficial testing and software systems frequently break. The more
complex the system, the more likely a fault will occur. Even simplistic code
can go wrong thanks to typos and misunderstandings, or changes to
environments blocking features of fixing problems that needed workarounds or
worse still problems that had been exploited.

So why is this relevant? Test Driven Development is a mechanism to ease the
pain of development, it doesn't solve all of the problems such as bad
requirements but it does give the developer a way to build code that works, can
be proven to work and that can be tested consistently.

Let's reimagine our story.

Bill receives a list of requirements from his boss to build a new must-have
app for the company. Bill takes each requirement and piece by piece turns each
into a test followed a little bit of code that makes that test successful. The
app comes together quickly and the test suite shows that all of the requirements
are featured and work as requested.

Soon more requirements arrive, following the same pattern Bill pieces together
new tests and new code to fulfil those requirements. When a new request
interferes with an existing requirement Bill can see where the problem is by
examining which tests fail, can refine the requirements and tests and quickly
resolve conflicts and problems to keep the app working.

When the desktop environment update arrives Bill sees there is a problem,
writes new tests to verify the fault and codes changes to fix the fault. That
doesn't mean it was easy, Bill is working hard still but the code keeps on
working and more feature requests keep rolling it. That must-have app just
keeps on getting better and better.

Ok, it is a bit simplified but it shows the point - what Bill is doing is called
Test Driven Development. It gives him the means to identify where things are not
working and to prove that things are working. The code being produced is
robust too - Bill can completely rewrite bits of the code without upsetting the
whole app.

So why do TDD? The answer is to skip the pain of development, we need a
structured approach to building and proving code. Without it things can get out
of control fast, unwanted and unnecessary code can creep in or be left in place
when it is no longer needed.

## What *is* TDD?

Test Driven Development is a mechanism for tackling the hard problem of making
software that works. It doesn't solve the problem, it just gives developers the
tools. It is also a pre-requisite for other practices and sits very, very well
with agile development.

At it's core TDD is a cycle of work typically referred to as "Red-green-refactor":

  1. Write a test
  2. Run all tests (red - because there should be a failure)
  3. Write implementation code
  4. Run all tests (green - because the failure is resolved)
  5. Refactor - code and tests
  6. Run all tests

It sounds simple because it **is** simple. Writing the test before the code is
written helps to separate requirements from implementation. It also means that
each test adds to the requirements included in the code, each new test should
fail, if it doesn't then the test is redundant or is incorrectly formed. The
code implementing the requirement should be the minimum needed to satisfy the
test. With all the tests running refactoring becomes less fraught - it is easy
to see when code changes have broken something because the tests start to fail.
Refactoring is only complete when all tests are running again.

The intention is that the developer should only spend a few minutes in each step
of the cycle, if it is taking longer than that the test is likely to be too
broad or the code is excessively complex.

## How to TDD

### Good Requirements

A fundamental key to TDD is the requirements - well written user stories that
have been decomposed into discrete implementation requirements feed the tests
that are needed to follow the TDD cycle. The essential detail is that the
requirements come first and define the tests, not the other way around.

### White-box Testing

TDD is about development and ensuring that the implementation is appropriate to
the requirements. In order to do this TDD needs to see the implementation as it
is part and parcel of the development process. Writing tests without any
knowledge of the software implementation is still appropriate but cannot provide
the test coverage, optimisation and accurate error-finding that white-box
testing permits.

### Black-box Testing

One of the limitations of white-box testing is that it is inherently closely
with the code which limits the scope of refactoring. Black-box testing treats
the implementation as opaque and is only concerned with the overall
functionality (which is why it is also known as functional-testing), this
decouples the code and testing.

### Stop Debugging

The bane of all developers - the software bug - has been around about as long
as software itself. Mistakes in coding, requirements or (in the case of the
original bug) an insect shorting out wires all require intervention to remedy
the problem so how can we stop debugging?

The simple answer is that you don't, what you can do is establish strong tests
with excellent code-coverage (it could be argued that the target is perfectly
complete). By doing this any problems become apparent quickly and can be
isolated, understood and fixed with relative ease. In most cases TDD removes the
need for debugging to the point where it becomes a rarity. In reality TDD breaks
debugging down to a small part of each red-green-refactor cycle, each piece of
implemented code is robust and reliable as a result.
